README.md, before:

# Arts - Application Root Subsystem

# Table of contents

- [Arts - Application Root Subsystem](#arts---application-root-subsystem)
- [Table of contents](#table-of-contents)
  - [What is Arts?](#what-is-arts?)
  - [Background](#background)
  - [Comparison](#comparison)
  - [Further Considerations](#further-considerations)
  - [Motivations](#motivations)
- [Get Arts](#get-arts)
- [Usage](#usage)
  - [Options](#options)
  - [Environment Variables](#environment-variables)
- [Use cases](#use-cases)
  - [Use apt packages in non-debian systems](#use-apt-packages-in-non-debian-systems)
  - [Use pacman packages on non-arch systems](#use-pacman-packages-on-non-arch-systems)
  - [Use AUR packages on non-arch systems](#use-aur-packages-on-non-arch-systems)
  - [Use alpine (apk) packages](#use-alpine-apk-packages)
  - [Use a pip package without installing pip/python](#use-a-pip-package-without-installing-pippython)
  - [Use a npm package without installing npm/nodejs](#use-a-npm-package-without-installing-npmnodejs)
  - [Compile an application without installing dependencies on the host](#compile-an-application-without-installing-dependencies-on-the-host)
- [Related Projects](#related-projects)

## What is Arts?

Application Root Subsystem (Arts), is a portable container and a tool to package
software that aims to work across several linux distros. It bundles all the
software dependencies and the software itself, within an executable. Unlike
alternatives such as `AppImage`, Arts employs a `proot` based approach,
preventing software from using host libraries by default. This also resolves
issues with hard-coded binary paths for dynamic libraries.

## Background

The diverse `GNU/Linux` ecosystem includes a vast array of distributions, each
with its own advantages and use cases. This can lead to cross-distribution
software compatibility challenges. Arts addresses these issues by:

* Extending the "one app = one file" concept, allowing users to save
  configurations within the application itself
* Utilizing its own root directory, enabling dynamic libraries with hard-coded
    paths to be packaged alongside the software without binary patching.
* Generating packaged software compatible with multiple Linux distributions
* Producing a binary that works without installation - simply click and use
* Operating without root permissions
* Restricting application access to user-specified files/folders
* Ensuring updates to host system libraries do not break Arts applications
* Supporting reconfiguration without rebuild
* Isolating the filesystem, therefore, not using host libraries that might be
    outdated/incompatible with the application.
* Enabling selective directory compression
* Allowing portable user configuration within the package

## Comparison

| Feature                                                                   | Arts          | Docker                     | AppImage |
| :---                                                                      | :---:         | :---:                      | :---:    |
| No superuser privileges to use                                            | x             | x<sup>2</sup>              | x
| No installation necessary                                                 | x             | Requires docker on the host| x
| Mountable as a filesystem                                                 | x             | x                          | x<sup>3</sup>
| Runs without mounting the filesystem                                      | x<sup>1</sup> |                            | x
| Straightforward build process                                             | x             | x                          |
| Desktop integration                                                       | x             |                            | x
| Extract the contents                                                      | x             | x                          | x
| Supports reconfiguration without rebuild                                  | x             | x (layers)                 |
| No host libraries used (Filesystem Isolation)                             | x             | x                          |
| Supports compression of specific directories/files in the package         | x             |                            |
| Portable mutable user configuration                                       | x             | x                          |
| Granular control over containerization                                    |               | x                          |
| Works without fuse installed (still requires kernel support)              | x<sup>4</sup> | x                          | x<sup>5</sup>
| Layered filesystem                                                        |               | x                          |
| Advanced networking management                                            |               | x                          |
| Advanced security features                                                |               | x                          |

> 1. Requires superuser privileges
> 1. Only if the user is part of the docker group
> 1. Only as read-only, you can mount ARTS as read-write, before compression.
> 1. Works without libfuse/libfuse3, still requires fusermount to be available.
> 1. Experimental implementations, available [here](https://github.com/probonopd/go-appimage) and [here](https://github.com/AppImage/type2-runtime)


## Further Considerations

Arts offers on build simplicity, packaging applications should be as simple as
installing them natively on the host system. This is an effort for the end-user
to not depend on the application developer to provide the portable binary (or to
handle how to package the application, dependencies and create a runner script).
It also simplifies the quality of life of the package developer, simplifying
the packaging process of applications.

## Motivations

1. The idea of this application sprung with the challenge to package software
   and dynamic libraries, such as `wine`, when there are hard-coded paths. The
   best solution is invasive
   [https://github.com/AppImage/AppImageKit/wiki/Bundling-Windows-applications](https://github.com/AppImage/AppImageKit/wiki/Bundling-Windows-applications)
   , which patches the binaries of wine directly to use a custom path for the
   32-bit libraries (an implementation of this concept is available
   [here](https://github.com/ruanformigoni/wine)), not only that, it requires to
   patch the `32-bit` pre-loader `ld-linux.so` as well, however, sometimes it
   still fails to execute properly. This is an over exceeding complexity for the
   end-user, which should package applications with no effort; `Arts` changes
   the root filesystem the application runs in, to a minimal gnu subsystem, and
   with that, it solves the previous issues with dynamic libraries no
   workarounds required. No host libraries are used, which decreases issues of
   portable applications working on one machine and not in other.

1. The fragmentation of the linux package management is considerable in modern
   times, e.g., `apt`, `pip`, `npm`, and more. To mitigate this issue `Arts` can
   perform the installation through the preferred package manager, and turn the
   program into an executable file, that can run in any linux distribution.
   E.g.: The user of `Arts` can create a binary of `youtube-dl`, from the `pip`
   package manager, without having either pip or python installed on the host
   operating system.

1. Some applications are offered as pre-compiled compressed tar files
   (tarballs), which sometimes only work when installed on the root of the
   operating system. However, doing so could hinder the operating system
   integrity, to avoid this issue `Arts` can install tarballs into itself and
   turn them into a portable binary.

# Get Arts

You can get the latest release [here](https://gitlab.com/formigoni/arts/-/releases).

# Usage

## Options

```
Application Chroot Subsystem (Arts)
Avaliable options:
- arts-compress: Compress the filesystem to a read-only format.
- arts-exec: Execute an arbitrary command.
- arts-root: Execute an arbitrary command as root.
- arts-cmd: Set the default command to execute.
- arts-resize: Resize the filesystem.
- arts-mount: Mount the filesystem in a specified directory
    - E.g.: ./focal.arts arts-mount ./mountpoint
- arts-xdg: Same as the 'arts-mount' command, however it opens the
    mount directory with xdg-open
- arts-help: Print this message.
```

## Environment Variables

* `ARTS_COMPRESSION_LEVEL`: Compression level of dwarfs (0-9), default is 6
* `ARTS_COMPRESSION_SLACK`: Extra space after filesystem is resized on
compression, default is 50000 (50MB).
* `ARTS_COMPRESSION_DIRS`: Directories to compress with dwarfs, default is `/usr /opt`.
* `ARTS_DEBUG`: If defined to 1, print debug messages.


# Use cases

To use arts there is no need to install anything, simply download an image in
the [releases](https://gitlab.com/formigoni/art/-/releases) page, i.e., `focal
(ubuntu)` or `arch`. The archive is compressed, extract it and use it as shown
in the following examples.

## Use apt packages in non-debian systems

```sh
 # 1. Set the filesystem as RW
 export ARTS_RW=1
 # 2. Set the maximum filesystem size (use du -sh ./focal.arts to see actual size)
./focal.arts arts-resize 10G
 # 3. Install the desired application in the ubuntu subsystem
./focal.arts arts-root apt install -y firefox
 # 4. Test the application
./focal.arts arts-exec firefox
 # 5. Set the default startup command
./focal.arts arts-cmd firefox
 # 6. (optional) Compress the package filesystem
./focal.arts arts-compress
 # 7. (optional) Rename the binary to the main application name
mv focal.arts firefox.arts
 # 8. Run the application (you can also click on it in your file manager)
./firefox.arts
```

## Use pacman packages on non-arch systems

```sh
 # 1. Set the filesystem as RW
 export ARTS_RW=1
 # 2. Set the maximum filesystem size (use du -sh ./focal.arts to see actual size)
./arch.arts arts-resize 10G
 # 3. Install the desired application in the ubuntu subsystem
./arch.arts arts-root pacman -S firefox --noconfirm
 # 4. Test the application
./arch.arts arts-exec firefox
 # 5. Set the default startup command
./arch.arts arts-cmd firefox
 # 6. (optional) Compress the package filesystem
./arch.arts arts-compress
 # 7. (optional) Rename the binary to the main application name
mv arch.arts firefox.arts
 # 8. Run the application (you can also click on it in your file manager)
./firefox.arts
```

## Use AUR packages on non-arch systems

```sh
 # 1. Set the filesystem as RW
 export ARTS_RW=1
 # 2. Set the maximum filesystem size (use du -sh ./focal.arts to see actual size)
./arch.arts arts-resize 10G
 # 3. Use the included aur script (root password is arch)
./arch.arts arts-root aur librewolf-bin
 # 4. Test the application
./arch.arts arts-exec librewolf
 # 5. Set the default startup command
./arch.arts arts-cmd librewolf
 # 6. (optional) Compress the package filesystem
./arch.arts arts-compress
 # 7. (optional) Rename the binary to the main application name
mv arch.arts librewolf.arts
 # 8. Run the application (you can also click on it in your file manager)
./librewolf.arts
```

## Use alpine (apk) packages

```sh
 # 1. Set the filesystem as RW
 export ARTS_RW=1
 # 2. Set the maximum filesystem size (use du -sh ./focal.arts to see actual size)
./alpine.arts arts-resize 2G
 # 3. Install firefox with apk
./alpine.arts arts-root apk add firefox font-noto
 # 4. Test the application
./alpine.arts arts-exec firefox
 # 5. Set the default startup command
./alpine.arts arts-cmd firefox
 # 6. (optional) Compress the package filesystem
./alpine.arts arts-compress
 # 7. (optional) Rename the binary to the main application name
mv alpine.arts firefox.arts
 # 8. Run the application (you can also click on it in your file manager)
./firefox.arts
```

## Use a pip package without installing pip/python

```sh
 # 1. Set the filesystem as RW
 export ARTS_RW=1
 # 2. Set the maximum filesystem size (use du -sh ./focal.arts to see actual size)
./focal.arts arts-resize 10G
 # 3. Install python-pip
./focal.arts arts-root apt install -y python3-pip
 # 4. Install the pip application inside the image
./focal.arts arts-root pip3 install youtube-dl
 # 5. Test the application
./focal.arts arts-exec youtube-dl -f 'bestvideo+bestaudio' https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=srnyVw-OR0g
 # 6. Set the default startup command
./focal.arts arts-cmd youtube-dl
 # 7. (optional) Compress the package filesystem
./focal.arts arts-compress
 # 8. (optional) Rename the binary to the main application name
mv focal.arts youtube-dl.arts
 # 9. Use the application (download youtube video)
./youtube-dl.arts -f 'bestvideo+bestaudio' https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=srnyVw-OR0g
```

## Use a npm package without installing npm/nodejs

```sh
 # 1. Set the filesystem as RW
 export ARTS_RW=1
 # 2. Set the maximum filesystem size (use du -sh ./focal.arts to see actual size)
./focal.arts arts-resize 10G
 # 3. Install npm/nodejs into the image
./focal.arts arts-root apt install -y curl
./focal.arts arts-root 'curl -fsSL https://deb.nodesource.com/setup_19.x \| bash -'
./focal.arts arts-root apt-get install -y nodejs mpv
 # 4. Install the npm application inside the image
./focal.arts arts-root npm install webtorrent-cli
 # 5. Test the application
./focal.arts arts-exec webtorrent magnet:?xt=urn:btih:dd8255ecdc7ca55fb0bbf81323d87062db1f6d1c --mpv
 # 6. Set the default startup command
./focal.arts arts-cmd webtorrent
 # 7. (optional) Compress the package filesystem
./focal.arts arts-compress
 # 8. (optional) Rename the binary to the main application name
mv focal.arts webtorrent.arts
 # 9. Use the application (stream legal torrent video)
./webtorrent.arts magnet:?xt=urn:btih:dd8255ecdc7ca55fb0bbf81323d87062db1f6d1c --mpv
```

Note that step 2 also installed mpv inside the image, it is required since the
image has no access to the host filesystem/applications.

## Compile an application without installing dependencies on the host

```sh
 # 1. Set the filesystem as RW
 export ARTS_RW=1
 # 2. Set the maximum filesystem size (use du -sh ./focal.arts to see actual size)
./focal.arts arts-resize 10G
 # 3. Fetch the application
git clone https://github.com/htop-dev/htop.git
 # 4. Install the required build dependencies
./focal.arts arts-root apt install -y libncursesw5-dev autotools-dev autoconf automake build-essential
 # 5. (optional) Compress the package filesystem
./focal.arts arts-compress
 # 6. Compile the application
cd htop
../focal.arts arts-exec './autogen.sh && ./configure && make'
 # 7. Run the compiled application
./htop
```

In this case `focal.arts` is now a portable building environment for htop.

# Related Projects

- [https://github.com/Kron4ek/Conty](https://github.com/Kron4ek/Conty)
- [https://github.com/genuinetools/binctr](https://github.com/genuinetools/binctr)
- [https://github.com/Intoli/exodus](https://github.com/Intoli/exodus)
- [https://statifier.sourceforge.net/](https://statifier.sourceforge.net/)
- [https://github.com/matthewbauer/nix-bundle](https://github.com/matthewbauer/nix-bundle)

<!-- // cmd: !./doc/toc.sh

Commit message:

Configurable ARTS base dir with XDG_CACHE_HOME

README.md, after:

# Arts - Application Root Subsystem

# Table of contents

- [Arts - Application Root Subsystem](#arts---application-root-subsystem)
- [Table of contents](#table-of-contents)
  - [What is Arts?](#what-is-arts?)
  - [Background](#background)
  - [Comparison](#comparison)
  - [Further Considerations](#further-considerations)
  - [Motivations](#motivations)
- [Get Arts](#get-arts)
- [Usage](#usage)
  - [Options](#options)
  - [Environment Variables](#environment-variables)
- [Use cases](#use-cases)
  - [Use apt packages in non-debian systems](#use-apt-packages-in-non-debian-systems)
  - [Use pacman packages on non-arch systems](#use-pacman-packages-on-non-arch-systems)
  - [Use AUR packages on non-arch systems](#use-aur-packages-on-non-arch-systems)
  - [Use alpine (apk) packages](#use-alpine-apk-packages)
  - [Use a pip package without installing pip/python](#use-a-pip-package-without-installing-pippython)
  - [Use a npm package without installing npm/nodejs](#use-a-npm-package-without-installing-npmnodejs)
  - [Compile an application without installing dependencies on the host](#compile-an-application-without-installing-dependencies-on-the-host)
- [Related Projects](#related-projects)

## What is Arts?

Application Root Subsystem (Arts), is a portable container and a tool to package
software that aims to work across several linux distros. It bundles all the
software dependencies and the software itself, within an executable. Unlike
alternatives such as `AppImage`, Arts employs a `proot` based approach,
preventing software from using host libraries by default. This also resolves
issues with hard-coded binary paths for dynamic libraries.

## Background

The diverse `GNU/Linux` ecosystem includes a vast array of distributions, each
with its own advantages and use cases. This can lead to cross-distribution
software compatibility challenges. Arts addresses these issues by:

* Extending the "one app = one file" concept, allowing users to save
  configurations within the application itself
* Utilizing its own root directory, enabling dynamic libraries with hard-coded
    paths to be packaged alongside the software without binary patching.
* Generating packaged software compatible with multiple Linux distributions
* Producing a binary that works without installation - simply click and use
* Operating without root permissions
* Restricting application access to user-specified files/folders
* Ensuring updates to host system libraries do not break Arts applications
* Supporting reconfiguration without rebuild
* Isolating the filesystem, therefore, not using host libraries that might be
    outdated/incompatible with the application.
* Enabling selective directory compression
* Allowing portable user configuration within the package

## Comparison

| Feature                                                                   | Arts          | Docker                     | AppImage |
| :---                                                                      | :---:         | :---:                      | :---:    |
| No superuser privileges to use                                            | x             | x<sup>2</sup>              | x
| No installation necessary                                                 | x             | Requires docker on the host| x
| Mountable as a filesystem                                                 | x             | x                          | x<sup>3</sup>
| Runs without mounting the filesystem                                      | x<sup>1</sup> |                            | x
| Straightforward build process                                             | x             | x                          |
| Desktop integration                                                       | x             |                            | x
| Extract the contents                                                      | x             | x                          | x
| Supports reconfiguration without rebuild                                  | x             | x (layers)                 |
| No host libraries used (Filesystem Isolation)                             | x             | x                          |
| Supports compression of specific directories/files in the package         | x             |                            |
| Portable mutable user configuration                                       | x             | x                          |
| Granular control over containerization                                    |               | x                          |
| Works without fuse installed (still requires kernel support)              | x<sup>4</sup> | x                          | x<sup>5</sup>
| Layered filesystem                                                        |               | x                          |
| Advanced networking management                                            |               | x                          |
| Advanced security features                                                |               | x                          |

> 1. Requires superuser privileges
> 1. Only if the user is part of the docker group
> 1. Only as read-only, you can mount ARTS as read-write, before compression.
> 1. Works without libfuse/libfuse3, still requires fusermount to be available.
> 1. Experimental implementations, available [here](https://github.com/probonopd/go-appimage) and [here](https://github.com/AppImage/type2-runtime)


## Further Considerations

Arts offers on build simplicity, packaging applications should be as simple as
installing them natively on the host system. This is an effort for the end-user
to not depend on the application developer to provide the portable binary (or to
handle how to package the application, dependencies and create a runner script).
It also simplifies the quality of life of the package developer, simplifying
the packaging process of applications.

## Motivations

1. The idea of this application sprung with the challenge to package software
   and dynamic libraries, such as `wine`, when there are hard-coded paths. The
   best solution is invasive
   [https://github.com/AppImage/AppImageKit/wiki/Bundling-Windows-applications](https://github.com/AppImage/AppImageKit/wiki/Bundling-Windows-applications)
   , which patches the binaries of wine directly to use a custom path for the
   32-bit libraries (an implementation of this concept is available
   [here](https://github.com/ruanformigoni/wine)), not only that, it requires to
   patch the `32-bit` pre-loader `ld-linux.so` as well, however, sometimes it
   still fails to execute properly. This is an over exceeding complexity for the
   end-user, which should package applications with no effort; `Arts` changes
   the root filesystem the application runs in, to a minimal gnu subsystem, and
   with that, it solves the previous issues with dynamic libraries no
   workarounds required. No host libraries are used, which decreases issues of
   portable applications working on one machine and not in other.

1. The fragmentation of the linux package management is considerable in modern
   times, e.g., `apt`, `pip`, `npm`, and more. To mitigate this issue `Arts` can
   perform the installation through the preferred package manager, and turn the
   program into an executable file, that can run in any linux distribution.
   E.g.: The user of `Arts` can create a binary of `youtube-dl`, from the `pip`
   package manager, without having either pip or python installed on the host
   operating system.

1. Some applications are offered as pre-compiled compressed tar files
   (tarballs), which sometimes only work when installed on the root of the
   operating system. However, doing so could hinder the operating system
   integrity, to avoid this issue `Arts` can install tarballs into itself and
   turn them into a portable binary.

# Get Arts

You can get the latest release [here](https://gitlab.com/formigoni/arts/-/releases).

# Usage

## Options

```
Application Chroot Subsystem (Arts)
Avaliable options:
- arts-compress: Compress the filesystem to a read-only format.
- arts-exec: Execute an arbitrary command.
- arts-root: Execute an arbitrary command as root.
- arts-cmd: Set the default command to execute.
- arts-resize: Resize the filesystem.
- arts-mount: Mount the filesystem in a specified directory
    - E.g.: ./focal.arts arts-mount ./mountpoint
- arts-xdg: Same as the 'arts-mount' command, however it opens the
    mount directory with xdg-open
- arts-help: Print this message.
```

## Environment Variables

* `ARTS_COMPRESSION_LEVEL`: Compression level of dwarfs (0-9), default is 6
* `ARTS_COMPRESSION_SLACK`: Extra space after filesystem is resized on
compression, default is 50000 (50MB).
* `ARTS_COMPRESSION_DIRS`: Directories to compress with dwarfs, default is `/usr /opt`.
* `ARTS_DEBUG`: If defined to 1, print debug messages.

The default path of `ARTS` temporary files are, in order of creation attempt:
- `$XDG_CACHE_HOME`
- `$HOME/.cache/arts`
- `/tmp/arts`


# Use cases

To use arts there is no need to install anything, simply download an image in
the [releases](https://gitlab.com/formigoni/art/-/releases) page, i.e., `focal
(ubuntu)` or `arch`. The archive is compressed, extract it and use it as shown
in the following examples.

## Use apt packages in non-debian systems

```sh
 # 1. Set the filesystem as RW
 export ARTS_RW=1
 # 2. Set the maximum filesystem size (use du -sh ./focal.arts to see actual size)
./focal.arts arts-resize 10G
 # 3. Install the desired application in the ubuntu subsystem
./focal.arts arts-root apt install -y firefox
 # 4. Test the application
./focal.arts arts-exec firefox
 # 5. Set the default startup command
./focal.arts arts-cmd firefox
 # 6. (optional) Compress the package filesystem
./focal.arts arts-compress
 # 7. (optional) Rename the binary to the main application name
mv focal.arts firefox.arts
 # 8. Run the application (you can also click on it in your file manager)
./firefox.arts
```

## Use pacman packages on non-arch systems

```sh
 # 1. Set the filesystem as RW
 export ARTS_RW=1
 # 2. Set the maximum filesystem size (use du -sh ./focal.arts to see actual size)
./arch.arts arts-resize 10G
 # 3. Install the desired application in the ubuntu subsystem
./arch.arts arts-root pacman -S firefox --noconfirm
 # 4. Test the application
./arch.arts arts-exec firefox
 # 5. Set the default startup command
./arch.arts arts-cmd firefox
 # 6. (optional) Compress the package filesystem
./arch.arts arts-compress
 # 7. (optional) Rename the binary to the main application name
mv arch.arts firefox.arts
 # 8. Run the application (you can also click on it in your file manager)
./firefox.arts
```

## Use AUR packages on non-arch systems

```sh
 # 1. Set the filesystem as RW
 export ARTS_RW=1
 # 2. Set the maximum filesystem size (use du -sh ./focal.arts to see actual size)
./arch.arts arts-resize 10G
 # 3. Use the included aur script (root password is arch)
./arch.arts arts-root aur librewolf-bin
 # 4. Test the application
./arch.arts arts-exec librewolf
 # 5. Set the default startup command
./arch.arts arts-cmd librewolf
 # 6. (optional) Compress the package filesystem
./arch.arts arts-compress
 # 7. (optional) Rename the binary to the main application name
mv arch.arts librewolf.arts
 # 8. Run the application (you can also click on it in your file manager)
./librewolf.arts
```

## Use alpine (apk) packages

```sh
 # 1. Set the filesystem as RW
 export ARTS_RW=1
 # 2. Set the maximum filesystem size (use du -sh ./focal.arts to see actual size)
./alpine.arts arts-resize 2G
 # 3. Install firefox with apk
./alpine.arts arts-root apk add firefox font-noto
 # 4. Test the application
./alpine.arts arts-exec firefox
 # 5. Set the default startup command
./alpine.arts arts-cmd firefox
 # 6. (optional) Compress the package filesystem
./alpine.arts arts-compress
 # 7. (optional) Rename the binary to the main application name
mv alpine.arts firefox.arts
 # 8. Run the application (you can also click on it in your file manager)
./firefox.arts
```

## Use a pip package without installing pip/python

```sh
 # 1. Set the filesystem as RW
 export ARTS_RW=1
 # 2. Set the maximum filesystem size (use du -sh ./focal.arts to see actual size)
./focal.arts arts-resize 10G
 # 3. Install python-pip
./focal.arts arts-root apt install -y python3-pip
 # 4. Install the pip application inside the image
./focal.arts arts-root pip3 install youtube-dl
 # 5. Test the application
./focal.arts arts-exec youtube-dl -f 'bestvideo+bestaudio' https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=srnyVw-OR0g
 # 6. Set the default startup command
./focal.arts arts-cmd youtube-dl
 # 7. (optional) Compress the package filesystem
./focal.arts arts-compress
 # 8. (optional) Rename the binary to the main application name
mv focal.arts youtube-dl.arts
 # 9. Use the application (download youtube video)
./youtube-dl.arts -f 'bestvideo+bestaudio' https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=srnyVw-OR0g
```

## Use a npm package without installing npm/nodejs

```sh
 # 1. Set the filesystem as RW
 export ARTS_RW=1
 # 2. Set the maximum filesystem size (use du -sh ./focal.arts to see actual size)
./focal.arts arts-resize 10G
 # 3. Install npm/nodejs into the image
./focal.arts arts-root apt install -y curl
./focal.arts arts-root 'curl -fsSL https://deb.nodesource.com/setup_19.x \| bash -'
./focal.arts arts-root apt-get install -y nodejs mpv
 # 4. Install the npm application inside the image
./focal.arts arts-root npm install webtorrent-cli
 # 5. Test the application
./focal.arts arts-exec webtorrent magnet:?xt=urn:btih:dd8255ecdc7ca55fb0bbf81323d87062db1f6d1c --mpv
 # 6. Set the default startup command
./focal.arts arts-cmd webtorrent
 # 7. (optional) Compress the package filesystem
./focal.arts arts-compress
 # 8. (optional) Rename the binary to the main application name
mv focal.arts webtorrent.arts
 # 9. Use the application (stream legal torrent video)
./webtorrent.arts magnet:?xt=urn:btih:dd8255ecdc7ca55fb0bbf81323d87062db1f6d1c --mpv
```

Note that step 2 also installed mpv inside the image, it is required since the
image has no access to the host filesystem/applications.

## Compile an application without installing dependencies on the host

```sh
 # 1. Set the filesystem as RW
 export ARTS_RW=1
 # 2. Set the maximum filesystem size (use du -sh ./focal.arts to see actual size)
./focal.arts arts-resize 10G
 # 3. Fetch the application
git clone https://github.com/htop-dev/htop.git
 # 4. Install the required build dependencies
./focal.arts arts-root apt install -y libncursesw5-dev autotools-dev autoconf automake build-essential
 # 5. (optional) Compress the package filesystem
./focal.arts arts-compress
 # 6. Compile the application
cd htop
../focal.arts arts-exec './autogen.sh && ./configure && make'
 # 7. Run the compiled application
./htop
```

In this case `focal.arts` is now a portable building environment for htop.

# Related Projects

- [https://github.com/Kron4ek/Conty](https://github.com/Kron4ek/Conty)
- [https://github.com/genuinetools/binctr](https://github.com/genuinetools/binctr)
- [https://github.com/Intoli/exodus](https://github.com/Intoli/exodus)
- [https://statifier.sourceforge.net/](https://statifier.sourceforge.net/)
- [https://github.com/matthewbauer/nix-bundle](https://github.com/matthewbauer/nix-bundle)

<!-- // cmd: !./doc/toc.sh
